---
layout: post
title: "Using cryptography for tamper-proof election results after close of polling"
permalink: /cryptography-election-results
---

Over the years, I've been somewhat dismayed by various reports of tampering of
[EVMs](https://www.eci.gov.in/evm/) after polls have closed. Especially in this
year's Lok Sabha polls the issue received a lot of coverage.

In this post I present an approach, using digital fingerprints, that will render
tampering of EVMs and election results **after close of polling** useless. While
there might be holes in this approach, I still believe there's merit in
discussing this.

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Summary

The solution involves generating and disclosing to the public a digital
fingerprint of the result from each EVM as soon as polls close. Each fingerprint
is a seemingly random string of characters, however they have a couple of highly
desirable properties:

1. A fingerprint is unique to each permutation of the result i.e. two different
   results will practically never have the same fingerprint
2. It is impossible to figure out the election result just by looking at the
   fingerprint

The fingerprints are generated using a [cryptographic hash function][]. In
subsequent sections, we will see how they work. But first, it's very important
to understand what this solution does not solve.

[cryptographic hash function]: https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographic_hash_function

## What this DOES NOT solve

The solution proposed here **cannot** prevent tampering of EVMs before, or
during, the election. Nor cannot it solve the problem of [booth
capture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Booth_capturing).

It only focuses on securing one aspect of the polling process, and that is
manipulation of election results after polling closes. In fact, it only works if
EVMs have not been tampered with, and booth capture has not occurred.

After disclosure of the digital fingerprint, which should be done as soon as
polling closes, tampering of EVMs becomes irrelevant as an altered result will
not be able to match the disclosed fingerprint.

## How it works

The following sections get into the details of how this scheme works.

### Crytographic hash functions

_(Skip this section if you already know how they work)_

A [cryptographic hash function][] is a mathematical construct that takes an
input text of any length and mixes its bytes to produce a fixed size
string. This string, also known as a _digest_ or a _hash_, is a digital
fingerprint of the input message.

Examples of such hash functions include MD5, SHA-1, SHA-3, etc.

Some example (SHA-1) hashes are shown below:

|------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------|
| Text                                           | Hash (SHA-1)                               |
|------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------|
| _abracadabra_                                  | `0b8c31dd3a4c1e74b0764d5b510fd5eaac00426c` |
| _the quick brown fox_                          | `ced71fa7235231bed383facfdc41c4ddcc22ecf1` |
| _the quick brown fix_                          | `e3a75de65fea42239e26476f6efe110f69932b8f` |
| _the quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dog_ | `3e4991b48bcb1bd9d3c4c14a1f24c415deaba466` |
|------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------|

A few important properties of cryptographic hashes are:

1. It is extremely easy to calculate the hash of any text
2. It is extremely difficult to find a text that has a given hash
3. If you have a text and its hash, it is extremely difficult to find another
   text that has the same hash.

Also, as the second and third examples show, even a slight change in text input
usually leads to large changes in the output hash.

So, while it's very easy to calculate the hash of the string "The quick brown
fox jumps over the lazy dog", it is impossible to do the reverse -- if all you
had was the hash `3e4991b48bcb1bd9d3c4c14a1f24c415deaba466`, you won't be able
to find the string that produced this hash.

Moreover, it is impossible to find another string that has the same hash.

Hash functions are also
[deterministic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deterministic_algorithm) i.e. they
will always produce the same output for the same input, no matter when or how
many times they are called.

It is important to understand that that hash functions **DO NOT** encrypt the
input string. There is no secret key involved, so there's no chance of losing a
key that will break the whole scheme. Hash functions only take one input -- the
text for which the digest needs to be produced.

(Note that while the examples here use [SHA-1][], it is quite old and not as
secure anymore. It is recommended to use [SHA-3][] instead. The only reason we
use SHA-1 here is for the purpose of readability - hash strings generated by
SHA-3 are a bit longer)

[SHA-1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-1
[SHA-3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-3

### Using hash functions to secure election results

What we are trying to achieve is this: once polling closes, we want a guarantee
that the result in an EVM at that moment will not be different from the
result that is revealed on counting day.

The result recorded in an EVM is simply a sequence of numbers, where each number
indicates the votes received by a candidate (the order of these numbers is the
same as the order of candidates on the ballot unit, which is fixed a few weeks
prior to voting).

Assume that at a polling station there are five candidates, and the result
stored inside the EVM at close of polling is this:
`400,300,500,200,100`. (i.e. the first candidate received 400 votes, the second
candidate received 300 votes, and so on). The SHA-1 hash of this string is
`91699a41d11cbe2e18319949151fd03ef529a833`.

The EVM will only reveal the generated hash string and nothing else. This can
safely be disclosed to the public at large.

On the day of counting, the EVM reveals the actual result. Anyone can look at
the result and compute its hash. If the computed hash matches the hash revealed
earlier, one can be fairly confident that the EVM has not been tampered with or
replaced after polling closed.

How do we know that this works? Remember that even if you know the original
string and the hash, you cannot find another string that has the same hash. So
even if someone were to break into an EVM, view the result and change it, they
can't find another sequence of numbers that would have the same hash. Replacing
an EVM won't help either since the hash is already public.

Another important aspect to consider is that one shouldn't be able to figure out
the result from the hash. Remember that it is impossible to figure out the
original string just from the hash, so this should in theory work. **However**,
since we already know the number of candidates and the voters, it may not be
that difficult to calculate the result by brute force, especially if the number
of candidates or voters is low. We'll discuss this in more detail next.

### Calculating the result by brute force

Consider a polling station with 50 voters and only 2 candidates. There are only
51 ways in which the vote share can be divided between the two candidates:

```
0,50
1,49
2,48
...
50,0
```

So if someone wants to know the poll result beforehand, they can simply compute
the hash for all 51 permutations of the result (i.e. create a [rainbow
table](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rainbow_table)):

|--------+--------------------------------------------|
| Result | Hash                                       |
|--------+--------------------------------------------|
| _0,50_ | `c87b42a20015ca36b3ee027a8e125c7a71e3d4f8` |
| _1,49_ | `151eaff1df5bbc8f0259d679047560b45740544e` |
| _2,48_ | `1f5916b0dbfa228a07b7d6293aca31e0e1dd53d6` |
| ...    |                                            |
| _50,0_ | `406840d6e2e9517378d13240b158c2cf843e8d67` |
|--------+--------------------------------------------|

Now compare the hash provided by the EVM with the hashes in this table. The
result is the one whose hash matches with the one provided by the EVM.

In essence, you are not breaking the hash function, but since the number of
possible inputs is small, you don't need to. You can simply compute the hash of
every possible input.

As the number of candidates and voters increase, the probability of being able
to carry out a brute force attack decreases:

* At 100 voters and 5 candidates, commodity hardware can crack the result in
  seconds.

* At 600 voters and 10 candidates, the fastest bitcoin mining hardware around
  (which specializes in computing hashes at a high speed) will take a few days
  to crack the result.

* At 1000 voters and 15 candidates, one can be fairly confident that even a
  nation-state cannot brute force their way to the result anytime soon.

(See the [addendum](#addendum-analysis-of-brute-force-attacks) for a more
detailed analysis behind these numbers)

All said and done, cryptographic hash functions alone are not sufficient to
protect the secrecy of election results. How do we fix this?

### Randomization

The answer lies in randomization. Generate a long enough random number, append
it to the result text, then compute the hash of this combined text. On counting
day, when the results are revealed, the random number that was used should be
revealed too, so that hash computation can still be verified independently.

Going back to our hypothetical result string: `400,300,500,200,100`. Let's say
the EVM generates this random number: `249825579`. We simply append this number
to the result: `400,300,500,200,100,249825579` and compute the hash of the
combined text. The resultant hash is revealed immediately. And on counting day,
the randomly generated number `249825579` is also revealed alongwith the each
candidate's vote count.

What's a long enough random number? A 128-bit random number (i.e. a number
picked at random from 2<sup>128</sup> possibilites) should be good enough. If a
true 128-bit random number is appended to every result text, no matter how low
the number of voters/candidates are, the number of permutations is no less than
2<sup>128</sup>. This is big enough that even if you had the all the bitcoin
mining hardware in the world at your disposal, Earth itself will be incinerated
by the Sun before you can compute the result.

The problem with random numbers, though, is that generating truly random numbers
is hard. And it is impossible to generate them from software without an external
source of randomness. Do EVMs ship with a
[component](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardware_random_number_generator) that
generates high quality random numbers? I think not.

## Concluding thoughts

### Feasibility

Can this scheme work? Probably yes.

Is it feasible to do this today? Probably no.

As discussed under randomization, EVMs most likely don't ship with a hardware
based random number generator. So adopting this approach will likely require a
hardware upgrade to EVMs, besides firmware upgrades. This alone makes this
scheme quite infeasible in the short term.

### Disclosure of voting patterns

One of the problems that has come up with EVMs (that didn't exist with paper
ballots) is that candidates will know how many votes they received from each
polling station in their constituency. Some of them have threatened voters with
post-poll reprisals if a particular area did not vote for them. This led to the
introduction of a [Totalizer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Totaliser) that
allows votes cast in about 14 polling stations to be counted together.

Our approach, which requires the hash and the random number to be generated in
the EVM, is not compatible with this.

For it to work, it's the totalizer instead of the EVMs that needs to change.

1. All the EVMs whose results are mixed in a single totalizer will need to be
   brought together as soon as polls close,
2. Random number and hash generation will happen in the totalizer after the
   results from these EVMs are added up.

### Impact of VVPATs

In recent years, the election commission introduced
[VVPAT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voter-verified_paper_audit_trail) based
EVMs -- besides registering the vote electronically, VVPAT machines also print
the vote on a paper, and store the paper votes in a sealed ballot box.

Unfortunately, only a small subset of paper votes are counted and tallied with
the EVM result. If all the paper based votes were to be counted, that combined
with a verifiable digital fingerprint of the result will, in my opinion, go a
long way towards assuring the public about the sanctity of the polling process.

## Addendum: Analysis of brute force attacks

_A more technical analysis of the efficacy of brute force attacks_

For a polling station with _n_ voters and _k_ candidates, the number of
different permutations of the result is <sup>n+k-1</sup>C<sub>k-1</sub>. The
[stars and bars](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stars_and_bars_(combinatorics))
method proves this theorem.

* For 50 voters and 2 candidates, <sup>50</sup>C<sub>2</sub> = 51 different
  results
* For 100 voters and 5 candidates, <sup>100</sup>C<sub>5</sub> = 4598126
  different results
* For 600 voters and 10 candidates, there are 29922628655119426996 results
* For 1000 voters and 15 candidates, there are 12734260985725567134324924085926
  results

How powerful a computer would you need to crack these results?

* Clearly 51 hashes can easily be cracked by any computing device.
* Commodity desktop hardware [can generally compute upto a few million hashes
  per
  second](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Non-specialized_hardware_comparison#CPUs.2FAPUs). This
  is good enough to crack the result for 100 voters and 5 candidates in a few
  seconds.
* At 600 voters and 10 candidates, we get into quintillions of hashes. Commodity
  hardware is no match for this. However today's [most powerful bitcoin mining
  hardware](https://www.asicminervalue.com/) can compute more than 50 trillion
  hashes per second. At this rate it will take a bitcoin miner around a week to
  crack the result. Well within the reach of individuals, forget nation states.
* At 1000 voters and 15 candidates though, the number is so huge that even if
  you had the peak hash rate of [the entire bitcoin
  network](https://www.blockchain.com/en/charts/hash-rate) (60 million trillion
  hashes per second) at your disposal, it would still take more than 6000 years
  to crack the result.

Finally, if you add a 128-bit random number in the mix, even with all the
computation power of the bitcoin network, you would still need hundreds of
billions of years to crack the result, well outside the realm of possibility.
